docs: Add Dovecot Lua auth guide + required package (#3579)
docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver: docs/content/config/advanced/auth-lua.md

1. Do I want to use Lua to identify mailboxes and verify that users are are authorized to use mail services? **No. Provisioning is done through LDAP.**
1. Do I want to use Lua to verify passwords that users authenticate with for IMAP/POP3/SMTP in their mail clients? **Yes. Password authentication is done through Lua.**
1. If the answer is 'yes' to question 1 or 2: are there other methods that better facilitate my use case instead of custom scripts which rely on me being a developer and not just a user? **No. Only HTTP can be used to authenticate against Nextcloud, which is not supported by Dovecot or DMS.**

While it is possible to extend what Nextcloud supports with [Nextcloud apps](https://apps.nextcloud.com/), there is currently a mismatch between what DMS supports and what Nextcloud applications support. This might change in the future. For now, Lua will be used to bridge the gap between DMS and Nextcloud for authentication only (Dovecot passdb), while LDAP will still be used to identify mailboxes and verify authorization (Dovecot userdb).

## Modify Dovecot's configuration

Add the following volume values to the relevant part of `compose.yaml`:

> ???+ example

Author: Done. Part of the next commit.

    ```yaml
        # All new volumes are marked :ro to configure them as read-only, since their contents are not changed from inside the container
        volumes:
          # Configuration override to disable LDAP authentication
          - ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/auth-ldap.conf.ext:/etc/dovecot/conf.d/auth-ldap.conf.ext:ro
          # Configuration addition to enable Lua authentication
          - ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/auth-lua-httpbasic.conf:/etc/dovecot/conf.d/auth-lua-httpbasic.conf:ro
          # Directory containing Lua scripts

>           - ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/lua/:/etc/dovecot/lua/:ro

Author: I now understand the feedback concerns the two added configuration files (for LDAP user provisioning and Lua user authentication). What I do not understand is if any more changes to this PR are required at this time. If there are, please note these concretely.

If not, I do realize that due to future changes to `check-for-changes.sh` there might be a better solution that does not depend on binding individual files.

    ```

Make the necessary changes on the filesystem:
```bash
mkdir -p ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/lua
docker cp CONTAINER_NAME:/etc/dovecot/conf.d/auth-ldap.conf.ext ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/auth-ldap.conf.ext

> ```

Reviewer: Regarding the prior review feedback with your response: https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/pull/3579#discussion_r1366689491

> The reason why I let the user make the directory beforehand is so that DMS does not have to be restarted (which would be overkill just to create a single directory).
> These files are read-only anyway. I agree that handholding is not necessary.

We have different perspectives. I assume the user does not already have a container running, especially since the earlier documentation requires configuration change to `compose.yaml` for volumes.

The lua directory will be created by Docker during that startup if it doesn't exist (_albeit with ownership of the Docker daemon user/group, which is sometimes inconvenient_).

If the user is providing Lua files here as you'd expect...they'd be capable of creating the directory themselves? So I questioned why `mkdir` was necessary to mention at all.

---

> As noted earlier, it is assumed that DMS is already up-and-running with LDAP authentication.
> Just referring to docker cp without any further hand-holding is fine.

Either I'm tired and missing the mention of a running DMS container with LDAP, or the guide to this point only mentions DMS will be configured to use LDAP, not that one is already setup and running.

> If a user does not realize a container needs to be running to copy files from it, the user would better not be messing around with Lua in the first place.

I'm not concerned about the user awareness with the `docker cp` command, but if it has any real relevance at all. It seems it can be dropped, as all you're doing is making a copy and editing it, you could just as easily create the file since it's being mounted back into the same place within the container. The user is reading a guide, copy/paste is fine.

---

> I disagree.
> The first line creates the lua directory so the user can work with it immediately.
> The second line copies the existing LDAP configuration file from the current container. This is better compared to including static configuration in the guide

The lua dir has been clarified above, I really don't see why `mkdir` is necessary but I'm not bothered leaving it there.

However since `docker cp` doesn't seem necessary, it really seems like this step is redundant.

You argue that it's better to copy than provide a static config, while the related [review feedback discussion](https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/pull/3579#discussion_r1357902407) regarding this notes that `docker cp` won't be resilient to such:
- In an already existing setup after this guide, no change will be handled by the user (_unless it's documented in release notes and they read that when upgrading_), thus broken setup. This has happened with existing configs where users have replaced them entirely only to change one line.
- If such a change happens, new users following the guide may find the `docker cp` instruction is either copying over a config no longer used/enabled for DMS LDAP support, or with changes since this guide was last updated that may be incompatible (_nothing comes to mind, other than some runtime modification during startup_).

My main concern is that it's rather implicit on the expectation of the contents. The main goal is to disable the `passdb` config, but the docs could better communicate/document the expectation of what `userdb` config was at the time of the guide being last updated.

Not a major concern, since one can use `git blame` on the docs, and check what version of DMS it was written for, then pull that image to get the contents. If it's going to be fragile regardless, being more explicit seems better 🤷‍♂️ 

```
userdb {
  driver = ldap
  args = /etc/dovecot/dovecot-ldap.conf.ext
}
```

Author: `docker cp` has been removed. Instead, the user creates a new file with the stated example `userdb` content. Change will be visible in the next commit.

---
title: 'Advanced | Lua Authentication'
---

## Introduction

Dovecot has the ability to let users create their own custom user provisioning and authentication providers in [Lua](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lua_(programming_language)#Syntax). This allows any data source that can be approached from Lua to be used for authentication, including web servers. It is possible to do more with Dovecot and Lua, but other use cases fall outside of the scope of this documentation page.

!!! warning

    DMS offers minimal support for Lua-based authentication due to it being an advanced method that can be used in many different ways. Do not open issues on GitHub or request support from DMS contributors for Lua scripts. The documentation on this page is all that is needed to get your own development started. Look elsewhere for Lua support.

!!! warning

>     Lua-based authentication relies on a Dovecot plugin. Dovecot is known to sometimes deprecate and remove support for their plugins (such as [CheckPassword](https://doc.dovecot.org/configuration_manual/authentication/checkpassword/)). DMS will drop support immediately if at some moment continued inclusion of the Lua plugin would not align with the DMS development process anymore.

Author: I made some slight alterations to the suggestion. It can concern multiple packages, depending on whether community repositories are used. The details of this are not relevant for this community guide, so I made it a bit more generic without taking anything away from the warning.

This will be resolved in the next documentation commit.

There are several questions you should ask yourself before you start:

1. Do I want to use Lua to identify mailboxes and verify that users are are authorized to use mail services? This refers in the world of Dovecot to Lua providing 'userdb' functionality, as in a data source for user provisioning.
1. Do I want to use Lua to verify passwords that users authenticate with for IMAP/POP3/SMTP in their (web) mail clients? This refers in the world of Dovecot to Lua providing 'passdb' functionality, as in a data source for user password verification.
1. If the answer is 'yes' to question 1 or 2: are there other methods that better facilitate my use case aside of custom scripts which rely on me being a developer and not just a user?

> If the answer is 'no' to question 3, Lua-based authentication might just be the thing for you.

Author: I revised it myself. Please see the next documentation commit.

To answer the questions asked earlier for this specific scenario:

1. Do I want to use Lua to identify mailboxes and verify that users are are authorized to use mail services? **No. Provisioning is done through LDAP.**
1. Do I want to use Lua to verify passwords that users authenticate with for IMAP/POP3/SMTP in their mail clients? **Yes. Password authentication is done through Lua.**
1. If the answer is 'yes' to question 1 or 2: are there other methods that better facilitate my use case instead of custom scripts which rely on me being a developer and not just a user? **No. Only HTTP can be used to authenticate against Nextcloud, which is not supported by Dovecot or DMS.**

While it is possible to extend what Nextcloud supports with [Nextcloud apps](https://apps.nextcloud.com/), there is currently a mismatch between what DMS supports and what Nextcloud applications support. This might change in the future. For now, Lua will be used to bridge the gap between DMS and Nextcloud for authentication only (Dovecot passdb), while LDAP will still be used to identify mailboxes and verify authorization (Dovecot userdb).

## Container variables to adjust

> Since Docker Mailserver provides minimal support for Lua with Dovecot, there are no environment variables to configure specifically for Lua. Some environment variables that do exist for other aspects of DMS might need to be configured based on the scenario you want to follow.

Author: Removed as suggested. Change will show up in the next documentation commit.

In the case of the example scenario, the environment variables must be configured as if users will be authenticated against LDAP (to support identification of mailboxes and verifying authorizations through LDAP). See [LDAP Authentication][docs-authldap] for more information. In addition, the following variables are required:

???+ example

    DMS configuration environment variables to let Postfix apply Lua authentication by proxy through Dovecot for authenticated SMTP.

    ```yaml
    - ENABLE_SASLAUTHD=1
    - SASLAUTHD_MECHANISMS=rimap
    - SASLAUTHD_MECH_OPTIONS=127.0.0.1

>     ```

Author: I tested this, and confirmed what you wrote.

The whole section will be removed with the next documentation commit.

## Modifying Dovecot's configuration

Add the following volume values to the relevant part of `compose.yaml`:

???+ example

    Override and add Dovecot configuration files and lua scripts.

    ```yaml
        volumes:
          - ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/auth-ldap.conf.ext:/etc/dovecot/conf.d/auth-ldap.conf.ext:ro
          - ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/auth-lua-httpbasic.conf:/etc/dovecot/conf.d/auth-lua-httpbasic.conf:ro
          - ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/lua/:/etc/dovecot/lua/:ro
    ```

> The first volume line [overrides][docs-dovecotoverrideconfiguration] Dovecot's standard LDAP authentication configuration file. The second line [adds][docs-dovecotaddconfiguration] a new configuration file for Lua authentication. The third line adds a directory which will contain Lua scripts. The files and directory will not be changed from inside the container, which is why they are configured as read-only.

Author: For a Lua directory I would not use individual binding of files. That would require unnecessary edits of `compose.yaml` anytime a Lua library is added. A separate directory was created for Lua files to avoid conflicts with configuration files.

Also note that Lua is not just configuration, but also program code. I do not know if it would be a good idea to reload Dovecot's configuration anytime a Lua script changes. Since it concerns an unsupported/advanced feature, wouldn't it be better to leave reloading of the configuration to the user?

Since this concerns future changes, I would leave it for now as it is. This is community-contributed documentation. It can lag a bit behind official releases and a bit of possible breakage is expected between releases. Once DMS includes the relevant changes, the documentation can be updated to incorporate these where relevant/necessary.

The next documentation commit has the comments included inside the `configuration.yaml` example code.

Make the necessary changes on the filesystem (*where `mailserver` is the container name*):
```bash
mkdir -p ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/lua
docker cp mailserver:/etc/dovecot/conf.d/auth-ldap.conf.ext ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/auth-ldap.conf.ext

> ```

Author: > * `*` should be `_` for our md italic convention.

Made this more consistent with the rest of the documentation, so the comment is not needed at all. Note that I base my documentation on other documentation pages, and some other pages also use `*` instead of `_`. It is not an issue anymore for this page.

>     * `compose.yaml` will create the lua directory itself (_although it'd be under the ownership of the user that `dockerd` runs as, which isn't always desirable_). Not necessary to hand-hold for that issue though I think.

The reason why I let the user make the directory beforehand is so that DMS does not have to be restarted (which would be overkill just to create a single directory). These files are read-only anyway. I agree that handholding is not necessary. 
 
>     * `docker cp` is fine, but this is referring to an existing container already existing.

As noted earlier, it is assumed that DMS is already up-and-running with LDAP authentication. Just referring to docker cp without any further hand-holding is fine. If a user does not realize a container needs to be running to copy files from it, the user would better not be messing around with Lua in the first place.

> When LDAP is enabled (`ACCOUNT_PROVISIONER=LDAP`), our startup scripts will disable our default Dovecot [passdb + userdb `passwd-file` config](https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/blob/82c38f242648290ab109de8e3994ea7564120deb/target/dovecot/auth-passwdfile.inc) and enable the `ldap` config instead by adjusting comments in the `10-auth.conf` config:
> 
> https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/blob/82c38f242648290ab109de8e3994ea7564120deb/target/scripts/startup/setup.d/ldap.sh#L54-L55

I am counting on this in this scenario.

> `user-patches.sh` could just as easily opt-out of the config by applying the reverse to the ldap config. Which may be relevant in future.
> 
> That has the following file contents:
> Click to view
> 
> In future for DMS we may switch to configs with separate passdb + userdb files as supporting OIDC may only be valid as a passdb AFAIK. If that happens we'll update your guide here.

That is allowed (of course!), but you can also give me a signal. I can help with the update. Lua authentication can be used for passdb + userdb, but the example only uses it for passdb. This makes it quite similar to OIDC, so it would be nice to implement it in the same way as OIDC would.
 
> Since there is anything special to copy from this config and you're advising to mount a different config anyway, there isn't much reason to include this step?

I disagree. The first line creates the lua directory so the user can work with it immediately. The second line copies the existing LDAP configuration file from the current container. This is better compared to including static configuration in the guide, in case the LDAP configuration file changes between now and when OIDC is implemented. Again, it is up to the user to make the relevant changes for the specific use case in the specific moment in time. The guide provides just an example which is kept up-to-date using best effort.

Of course, I realize an update of the guide will be necessary in the future. It'll happen when it is needed.

Edit configuration file `./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/auth-ldap.conf.ext`. Comment out the passdb section. An excerpt of what that part would look like after you are done:
```
#passdb {
#  driver = ldap
#
#  # Path for LDAP configuration file, see example-config/dovecot-ldap.conf.ext
#  args = /etc/dovecot/dovecot-ldap.conf.ext
#}
```

> Don't touch anything else in the file.

Author: I'll keep this in mind when the time comes to revise the documentation when the way DMS works with configuration files is changed in the future. Of course, you can also update it yourself then. Alternatively, hit me up.

Create configuration file `./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/auth-lua-httpbasic.conf` with contents:
```
passdb {
  driver = lua
  args = file=/etc/dovecot/lua/auth-httpbasic.lua blocking=yes
}

> ```

Reviewer: Likewise, this may break for you in future when you're relying on DMS being configured for a specific `ACCOUNT_PROVISIONER` which makes certain assumptions. This is probably another caveat that could be mentioned in the disclaimer at the start of this guide, since breakage can work both ways.

When the OIDC feature is closer to being merged, we may be able to support an BYO config, but I think that'd still run into compatibility issues with some features of DMS (_eg: Dovecot sieve scripts, v13 recently received a fix to adjust the home directory within an accounts mailbox, LDAP doesn't have that and some users may explicitly configure their own location which won't be compatible_). Semver releases will hopefully at least prevent the likelihood of breakage for you between major releases.

---

BTW this section for Dovecot seems it's missing enabling the config? The LDAP config will be included, but you'll likely need a line similar to this:

https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/blob/82c38f242648290ab109de8e3994ea7564120deb/target/dovecot/10-auth.conf#L125

I don't recommend volume mounting a replacement config for `10-auth.conf`, so `user-patches.sh` is probably beneficial for you. Keep in mind that if you just append the needed line, without a conditional to prevent adding it again this will pile up across container restarts (_unless the user follows our advice to always re-create the container, but many seem to miss this_), as internal state is persisted within the container until it's removed.

Eventually, we'll probably provide our customizations from a separate location, and always copy them over during container startup to minimize the issue so that config modifications are more deterministic.

Author: > Likewise, this may break for you in future when you're relying on DMS being configured for a specific `ACCOUNT_PROVISIONER` which makes certain assumptions. This is probably another caveat that could be mentioned in the disclaimer at the start of this guide, since breakage can work both ways.

A good point. I added an additional line to the warning at the top of this guide to note this.

> When the OIDC feature is closer to being merged, we may be able to support an BYO config, but I think that'd still run into compatibility issues with some features of DMS (_eg: Dovecot sieve scripts, v13 recently received a fix to adjust the home directory within an accounts mailbox, LDAP doesn't have that and some users may explicitly configure their own location which won't be compatible_). Semver releases will hopefully at least prevent the likelihood of breakage for you between major releases.

We'll cross that bridge when we get there.

> BTW this section for Dovecot seems it's missing enabling the config? The LDAP config will be included, but you'll likely need a line similar to this:
> 
> https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/blob/82c38f242648290ab109de8e3994ea7564120deb/target/dovecot/10-auth.conf#L125
> 
> I don't recommend volume mounting a replacement config for `10-auth.conf`, so `user-patches.sh` is probably beneficial for you. Keep in mind that if you just append the needed line, without a conditional to prevent adding it again this will pile up across container restarts (_unless the user follows our advice to always re-create the container, but many seem to miss this_), as internal state is persisted within the container until it's removed.

Unnecessary. `auth-lua-httpbasic.conf` has the `.conf` extension. All `.conf` files are loaded automatically. See:

```
dovecot.conf:!include conf.d/*.conf
```

> Eventually, we'll probably provide our customizations from a separate location, and always copy them over during container startup to minimize the issue so that config modifications are more deterministic.

I am looking forward to that. Please document this, and point me in the right direction when the time comes. I will be happy to adjust the current example to a better supported environment for community contributions.

That is all for configuring Dovecot.

## Create the Lua script

Create Lua file `./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/lua/auth-httpbasic.lua` with contents:

```lua
local http_url = "https://nextcloud.example.com/remote.php/dav/"
local http_method = "PROPFIND"
local http_status_ok = 207
local http_status_failure = 401
local http_header_forwarded_for = "X-Forwarded-For"

package.path = package.path .. ";/etc/dovecot/lua/?.lua"
local base64 = require("base64")

local http_client = dovecot.http.client {
    timeout = 1000;
    max_attempts = 1;
    debug = false;

> }

Reviewer: Indent is 4 spaces here instead of 2 like the rest of the lua file? Any reason for that?

Author: A sloppy copy. Fixed in the next documentation commit.

function script_init()
  return 0
end

function script_deinit()
end

> function is_nextcloud_apppassword(password)
>   return string.find(password, "%w%w%w%w%w%-%w%w%w%w%w%-%w%w%w%w%w%-%w%w%w%w%w%-%w%w%w%w%w") ~= nil
> end

Reviewer: **Optional**

Using `+` (_one or more_) and [makes the pattern a little easier to grok](https://gitspartv.github.io/lua-patterns/?pattern=%25w%2B-%25w%2B-%25w%2B-%25w%2B-%25w%2B). Although it's less specific (_[Lua pattern matching](https://riptutorial.com/lua/topic/5829/pattern-matching) doesn't seem to support repetition length like regex can_):

```suggestion
function is_nextcloud_apppassword(password)
  return string.find(password, "%w+-%w+-%w+-%w+-%w+") ~= nil
end
```

```bash
cd ./docker-data/dms/config/dovecot/lua
curl -JLO https://raw.githubusercontent.com/iskolbin/lbase64/master/base64.lua
```

Only use native (pure Lua) libraries as dependencies, such as `base64.lua` from the example. This ensures maximum compatibility. Performance is less of an issue since Lua scripts written for Dovecot probably won't be long or complex, and there won't be a lot of data processing by Lua itself. To see which Lua version is used by Dovecot if you plan to do something that is version dependent, run:

```bash
docker exec mailserver strings /usr/lib/dovecot/libdovecot-lua.so|grep '^LUA_'

> ```

Reviewer: Shift into Debugging section?

Author: Done for the part about finding out which Lua version is used by Dovecot. The part about using additional libraries I want to keep at the place it currently is, since it is essential for Lua development and a bit of a pain to figure out if starting from scratch.

This change is part of the next documentation commit.

## Debugging a Lua script

> Aside of succeeded and failed authentication attempts for any passdb backend, Dovecot also logs Lua scripting errors and messages send to Dovecot's [Lua API log functions](https://doc.dovecot.org/admin_manual/lua/#dovecot.i_debug). The combined DMS log (including that of Dovecot) can be viewed using `docker logs mailserver` (*where `mailserver` is the container name*). If the log is too noisy (due to other processes in the container also logging to it), `docker exec mailserver cat /var/log/mail/mail.log` can be used to view the log of Dovecot and Postfix specifically. If working with HTTP in Lua, setting `debug = true;` when initiating `dovecot.http.client` will create debug log messages for every HTTP request and response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Dovecot logs the status of authentication attempts for any passdb backend, Dovecot will also log Lua scripting errors and messages sent to Dovecot's [Lua API log functions](https://doc.dovecot.org/admin_manual/lua/#dovecot.i_debug).

The combined DMS log (including that of Dovecot) can be viewed using `docker logs CONTAINER_NAME`. If the log is too noisy (_due to other processes in the container also logging to it_), `docker exec CONTAINER_NAME cat /var/log/mail/mail.log` can be used to view the log of Dovecot and Postfix specifically.

If working with HTTP in Lua, setting `debug = true;` when initiating `dovecot.http.client` will create debug log messages for every HTTP request and response.
```

The 2nd paragraph has a bit of [overlap with our dedicated debugging page](https://docker-mailserver.github.io/docker-mailserver/v12.1/config/debugging/#debug-a-running-container) on getting logs.

Author: Agreed. Suggestion has been implemented in the next documentation commit.

> Note that Lua runs compiled bytecode, and that scripts will be compiled when they are initially started. Once compiled, the bytecode is cached and changes in the script will not be processed. [Restart sub-service Dovecot][docs-faqalterdms] using `docker exec mailserver supervisorctl restart dovecot` to have Dovecot load a changed Lua script.

Reviewer: Could you confirm that restarting the Dovecot service completely is required? Or is it sufficient to run `dovecot reload`? (_which is what [`check-for-changes.sh` does](https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/blob/82c38f242648290ab109de8e3994ea7564120deb/target/scripts/check-for-changes.sh#L57)_)

[docs-authldap]: ./auth-ldap.md
[docs-dovecotoverrideconfiguration]: ./override-defaults/dovecot.md#override-configuration
[docs-dovecotaddconfiguration]: ./override-defaults/dovecot.md#add-configuration

> [docs-faqalterdms]: ../../faq.md#how-to-alter-a-running-dms-instance-without-relaunching-the-container

Reviewer: Convention for ref links is to categorize/group with the `::` delimiter, and use kebab-case for better readability during maintenance.

eg: `docs::faq-alter-dms` / `docs::faq::alter-dms`

Main gripe is the lack of a delimiter between words.

Author: I based my references on those used in the [LDAP documentation](https://github.com/docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver/blob/master/docs/content/config/advanced/auth-ldap.md?plain=1). No matter. It is altered as suggested, and will show up in the next documentation commit.
